Colon Modeling Open Source Tool (CMOST)



Notes and User Manual

Program generated by Meher Prakash and Benjamin Misselwitz



Table of content:

I. PROGRAM AND REQUIREMENTS	3

II. CMOST Folder Contents	4

II.2 CMOST applications	5

III. Opening the program	6

IV. CMOST Main Window	7

IV.1. Main Window: Paths and settings	7

IV.2. Start, patients and additional settings	8

IV.3. Screening and Surveillance	9

IV.4. Output	10

IV.5. Scan variables	10

IV.6. Automated optimization	11

IV.6. Options	12

IV.6.1. Write CMOST batch instructions – Automatic tests	12

IV.6.2. Write CMOST batch instructions – Repeat identical settings	12

IV.6.3. Calibration Step 1, 2, 3	12

IV.6.3. Autocalibration Step 4 rectosigmo	13

V. CMOST output	13

V.1. CMOST graphical output	13

V.1.1. First page of CMOST graphical Results – Early and advanced adenoma prevalence, CRC incidence	14

V.1.2. Second page of CMOST graphical results: adenoma characteristics	14

V.1.3. Third page of CMOST graphical results: Cancer characteristics	17

V.1.4. Fourth page of CMOST graphical results - CRC effects and CRC Screening	19

V.2. CMOST Results (Matlab variable)	20

V.3. CMOST Results (Excel File)	21

VI. Adjusting CMOST	22

VI.1. Risk	22

VI.2. Location	23

VI.3. Mortality	25

VI.4. Colonoscopy	26

VI.5. Costs	27

VI.6. Screening	27

VI.7. Adenoma dwell time	28

VII. Parameter optimization	29

VII.1. Step 1: Early adenomas	30

VII.1.1. Early adenoma benchmarks	30

VII.1.2. Optimizing early adenomas	31

VII.2. Step 2: Advanced adenomas	33

VII.2.1. Advanced adenoma benchmarks	33

VII.2.2. Optimizing advanced adenomas	34

VII.3. Step 3: Optimizing cancer	35

VII.3.1. Benchmarks for cancer optimization	35

VII.3.1. Optimizing cancer parameters	36

VII.4. Step 4: Adjusting direct cancer	37

VII.4.1. Benchmarks for adjusting direct cancer	37

VII.4.1. Optimizing direct cancer parameters	38

VII.5. Suggested scheme for automated calibration	39

VII.6. Alternative strategy for Step 4, adjustment of direct cancer	39

VII.7. Concomitant adjustment of Steps 1-3	40

VII.8. Manual adjustments	42

VII.9. Default benchmarks	43

VIII.  Speed of calculations	43

VIII.1. Speed limit	43

VIII.2. Accelerating speed: the coder option	44

IX. Running CMOST in batch mode	46

IX.1. Using the STARTER option	46

IX.2. Parallel Calculations on a Linux cluster	47

IX.3. Generating multiple settings files with the “Scan Variables” option	49

IX.4. Simulating large populations	50





I. PROGRAM AND REQUIREMENTS



Checking out: CMOST program source code is uploaded to gitlab. The code is available for the researchers under GNU Public license. The last version of the code can be checked out in a LINUX/UNIX environment with the command:  

$ git clone https://gitlab.com/cmostmodel/CMOST.git



or in a internet browser, visit the URL 



https://gitlab.com/cmostmodel/CMOST 

and click on the “Download Zip” option as shown below.

 





This will download the CMOST source code on your machine. Unzip the folder to access the source files.



Software requirements: 



CMOST program runs on Matlab R2011b or later versions (versions later than 2015b have not been tested).

 

The computationally intensive part of the Matlab program is converted into a C++ executable (MEX file, details in Section VIII.2. Accelerating speed, the Coder option below). We provide compiled versions for Mac64, Windows64, Linux64. In case another operating system is installed, coder generation should be done (otherwise calculations for large population sizes will be slow). In order to achieve this conversion Matlab requires the “coder toolbox” and compilers to be installed. 

If no compiled versions of the time critical NumberCrunching subroutine are available an error message is provided:





Some of the compilers include Microsoft Windows SDK 7.1, Microsoft Visual C++ 2010 on windows, GNU gcc 4.3.x on Linux, Apple Xcode 4.1 on Mac OS X. 

One can check the list of supported compilers for the version of Matlab at the Mathworks website. For example, Matlab R2011b supports the following compilers.

http://www.mathworks.com/support/compilers/R2011b/win32.html 



System requirements: A standard calculation of 100,000 individuals requires a 2 GB RAM and 2.5 GHz processing speed. Calculations with larger populations (a few million might be a routine calculation of interest for health economists) require larger RAM. To make the calculation easier, the job is split into sub populations of 100,000 and run in parallel on a large computer cluster.

II. CMOST Folder Contents

 

CMOST folder includes: 



Software package implemented in MATLAB



1a. CMOST_Main GUI: Graphical User Interface which can be the starting point for the microsimulation calculations



1b. CalculateSub: This subroutine processes the inputs including the risks of adenomas, cancers as well as the preferences of screening method and passes this data to the next module



1c. NumberCrunching: This module handles the most computationally intensive part of the software. The module performs the microsimulation by tracking over the entire population, all the adenomas that appeared and evolved in each individual from the population



1d. Evaluation: This module processes the results from the microsimulation and presents them as graphical comparisons to benchmarks, matlab data file for further processing and as excel sheets. 



1e. Other CMOST subroutines: 
(to be explained below)



1f. Scripts to run the calculations on cluster. The scripts are useful for submitting multiple calculations simultaneously on a linux cluster.





2. Settings folder with pre-calibrated settings files



2a. Parameter set with dwell time 8 years (CMOST8.mat)

2b. Parameter set with dwell time 13 years (CMOST13.mat)

2c. Parameter set with dwell time 19 years (CMOST19.mat)



3. Cluster folder with scripts for submission to cluster

4. Codegen folder with MEX files compiled for running CMOST Matlab code efficiently

5. Manual

II.2 CMOST applications

CMOST as an open source program, with pre-calibrated settings caters to the following cases with the different levels of complexity.







III. Opening the program



The program CMOST_Main.m can be opened with the Matlab Editor and started (press run, see red arrow).







This calls the function CMOST_Main.m in a graphical user interface. 







IV. CMOST Main Window

After starting CMOST the following graphical user interface will appear:



Most basic functions of CMOST are accessible via the graphical user interface. 

IV.1. Main Window: Paths and settings 







Settings name: 	Name of the current settings of CMOST 

Save data path: 	Results of CMOST calculations will be saved under this path

Browse button: 	Browse for another path to save data

Comment: 		These comments will be saved with the settings 

Default Settings: 	Since the current settings might be derived from a different set of settings, the name of the original settings will be saved.

Load Settings button: Browse to load saved settings

Save Settings button: Save current settings for future use



Comment: Saved settings can be considered as instructions for an automated run by CMOST; they can be used for an automatic run by CMOST either with the Starter option in the graphical user interface or on the cluster. 



IV.2. Start, patients and additional settings 

(upper left part of main window)







Number Patients:	Adjust the number of patients for the next run of CMOST. For technical reasons (usage of the coder programming module in Matlab) only 4 options are available: 10’000, 25’000, 50’000 and 100’000 patients. A larger number of patients will be difficult for Matlab due to limitations in memory. If necessary, several runs with 100’000 patients should be combined.  

START:	Start a run of Matlab with current settings



Load multiple Jobs: Starter option allows loading several saved runs of CMOST which can be calculated sequentially

Start multiple Jobs:	Start calculations of the files selected with Starter option

Risk: 	Opens menu to adjust risk distribution of individual risk of adenoma development and early and advanced adenoma progression (see below)

Location:	Opens menu to adjust behavior of CMOST in various locations within the colon (i.e. adenoma appearance, progression, detection by colonoscopy); see below.

Mortality:	Opens menu to adjust CRC mortality according to age 

Colonoscopy: Opens menu to adjust CMOST settings regarding colonoscopy 

(for instance complications)

Costs:		Opens menu to adjust costs for interventions and CRC treatment

Screening:	Opens a menu to adjust settings for CRC screening

IV.3. Screening and Surveillance 

(lower left in main window)





Enable CRC screening: If this box is checked, CRC screening will be performed (screening parameters will be adjusted in Screening window)

Enable adenoma surveillance: If this box is checked, surveillance colonoscopies will be performed (5 years after detection of 1 or 2 early adenomas, 3 years after detection of an advanced adenomas and 5 years henceforward)

Enable cancer surveillance: CRC surveillance colonoscopies will be performed 1 and 4 years after CRC detection and henceforward every 5 years.

Special scenarios: If this box is checked one of the special scenarios below will be considered during CMOST calculations



Special scenarios: The text indicates the special scenario. Several strings are known to CMOST (see below). If a different string is entered the special scenario will be ignored. Several special scenarios are hard coded:

“RS-Atkin”: simulation of the rectosigmoidoscopy study by Atkin et al., Lancet 2012), treatment arm 

“RS-Atkin_Mock”: simulation the rectosigmoidoscopy study by Atkin et al., Lancet 2012), control arm without screening

“RS-Schoen”: simulation of rectosigmoidoscopy study by Schoen et al. NEJM 2012, treatment arm

“RS-Schoen_Mock” simulation of the rectosigmoidoscopy study by Schoen et al. NEJM 2012, control arm without screening

“RS-Holme”: simulation of rectosigmoidoscopy study by Holme et al. JAMA 2014, treatment arm

RS-Holme_Mock”: simulation of rectosigmoidoscopy study by Holme et al. JAMA 2014, control arm without screening

RS-Segnan”: simulation of rectosigmoidoscopy study by Segnan et al. JNCI 2011, treatment arm

RS-Segnan_Mock”: RS-Segnan”: simulation of rectosigmoidoscopy study by Segnan et al. JNCI 2011, control arm without screening

“perfect”, perfect intervention: simulation “maximum clinical incidence reduction. At age 65 all colonic lesions will be removed and the evolution of new lesions will be followed (van Ballegooijen et al., Med. Dec Making 2011)

“Po+-55”: at age 55 all individuals with and without adenomas will be marked  to be able to distinguish differences of both populations

“Po+-55treated”: as above, only adenomas will be removed; thereby, individuals with treated adenomas at age 55 can be compared with individuals without adenomas. (Kuntz et al., Med. Dec Making 2011)

“Kolo1”: A single colonoscopy at a given age will be performed 
(technical comment: age can be found at the third position in the colonoscopy screening window or at: handles.Variables.Screening.Colonoscopy(3))

“Kolo2”: Two colonoscopies will be performed at pre-specified ages
The year of the second colonoscopy can be found at the fourth position in the colonoscopy screening window or at:
handles.Variables.Screening.Colonoscopy(4))

“Kolo3”: Two colonoscopies will be performed at pre-specified ages
The year of the third colonoscopy can be found at the fifth position in the colonoscopy screening window or at:
handles.Variables.Screening.Colonoscopy(5))

IV.4. Output





During a run of CMOST the program can generate a results file (Matlab variable), an Excel file and/ or .pdf figures. Output will be saved in the Results-Folder (compare Paths and Settings above)



IV.5. Scan variables





Variables Scan (Special Scenarios): enables systematic scanning of CMOST parameters. Thereby up to 5 parameters can be modified in parallel or 2 or 3 individual parameters can be scanned independently (thus generating a 2D or 3D matrix of parameters). The result will be a number of settings files which could be run on a Linux cluster or by using the Start option. 

IV.6. Automated optimization







Optimization of parameters required for calibrating the model will be done in 4 separate steps. Step 1 deals with early adenoma prevalence, progression and distribution. Step 2 deals with advanced adenoma prevalence and distribution. Step 3 deals with carcinoma incidence, fast cancer (derived from adenoma precursors other than P6) and rectum carcinoma. Step 4 adjusts the direct cancer rate (cancer without adenomatous precursors).   

Step 1 bench marks: opens a window to adjust benchmarks for Step 1

Step 2 bench marks: opens a window to adjust benchmarks for Step 2

Step 3 bench marks: opens a window to adjust benchmarks for Step 3

Step 4 bench marks: opens a window to adjust benchmarks for Step 4



Optimize step 1: opens a window for automatic parameter adjustment step 1  

Optimize step 2: opens a window for automatic parameter adjustment step 2  

Optimize step 3: opens a window for automatic parameter adjustment step 3  

Optimize step 4: opens a window for automatic parameter adjustment step 4  



Manual adjustments: Opens a window to visualize and manually adjust all parameters important for a run of CMOST (these are the parameters automatically adjusted by Step 1 – Step 4).



Default benchmarks: No window will be opened. The current benchmarks will be replaced by benchmarks provided by the authors 

 

IV.6. Options





Some functionality is available via this dropdown menu

IV.6.1. Write CMOST batch instructions – Automatic tests

A larger series of instruction files for CMOST is written enabling testing of standard features of CMOST. These includes most of the tests from the CMOST manuscripts. The user is asked to select the folder where the files will be saved and the number of replicas. 

Tests include:

Screening colonoscopy (ages 50-70, every 10 years with follow up)

Rectosigmoidoscopy screening (ages 50-70, every 10 years with follow up)

Screening with FOBT, I-FOBT, Hemoccult Sensa, no intervention for comparison

Simulation of randomized controlled trials for rectosigmoidoscopy screening (according to Atkin et al., Schoen et al., Holme et al. and Segnan et al.) with intervention and Mock

Comparison of individuals with and without adenomas at age 55, treated and untreated

“perfect intervention” (i.e. “maximum clinical incidence reduction”, see CMOST for details) 

These instruction files could either be transferred to a linux cluster or calculated using the (see appropriate section of this Manual). In the folder “Scripts” in the CMOST-folder the file “Evaluate standard settings” will be helpful for evaluations (please note that writing Excel file does not work on a Mac computer).

IV.6.2. Write CMOST batch instructions – Repeat identical settings

You are allowed to select a folder and the number of replicas. After that the current settings of CMOST will be saved with the chosen number of copies. This is for instance useful if a number of parallel calibrations will be needed. 

IV.6.3. Calibration Step 1, 2, 3

Autocalibration 123

Will perform automated calibrations step 1-3 without graphical output and without detailed reporting of results in one procedure. This might need several hours. See section VII.7. for more detail.



 Autocalibration 123 bootstrapping

As above with bootstrapping (see VII.7. for more detail). Please note that bootstrapping has not been sufficiently tested and usage is not recommended.

IV.6.3. Autocalibration Step 4 rectosigmo

Autocalibration RS tests writing

Writes a battery of tests for titrating the best CancerVariable for direct cancer which appears without adenomatous precursors (Step 4 of Autocalibration). These files can be calculated using the Starter option or the Cluster. See Section “VII.7. Alternative strategy for Step 4, adjustment of direct cancer” for more detail.



Autocalibration RS tests writing

The user is asked to select a folder with calculated files for RS tests (see above). The results will be plotted, the best CancerVariable selected and transferred to the current settings (if user agrees). See Section “VII.7. Alternative strategy for Step 4, adjustment of direct cancer” for more detail.

V. CMOST output



Running CMOST calculation generates three different types of outputs - 



Graphical output of the natural history, comparing to the benchmarks used. The output is saved in PDF format as OUTPUT_NAME_1.pdf, …_2.pdf, …_3.pdf, OUTPUT_NAME_4.pdf. 

Excel format results file, summarizing the number of colonoscopies, number of cancers, etc. This is saved as OUTPUT_NAME.xls. 

Matlab format results file, which has all the detailed results including developed or detected adenomas, cancers, costs, etc. This results file is saved under the name OUTPUT_NAME_Results.mat and can be used for incidence, cost calculations, etc. 

All these results are saved in the results folder (see IV.1).

V.1. CMOST graphical output

If the “generate pdf file” option is checked, after a run of CMOST (i.e. after pressing “Start”) 4 different pdf files are generated. CMOST also generates Matlab figures. For convenience these figures are not closed after saving the pdf files.



V.1.1. First page of CMOST graphical Results – Early and advanced adenoma prevalence, CRC incidence

The first page deals with early adenoma prevalence (left column), advanced adenoma prevalence (middle column) and carcinoma incidence (right column). Results are indicated separately for males (upper row), females (middle row) and overall (lower row). 

 



Early and advanced adenoma prevalence and CRC incidence for the overall population. Similar graphs are generated for males and females. Benchmarks (as adjusted in the benchmark windows) are indicated in blue; actual results of CMOST calculations are indicated by the black line. Data points corresponding to the benchmarks are plotted separately in green (if the respective point is situated within an arbitrary 20% tolerance from the benchmark) or in red (if the data point is outside this tolerance range). Note: no tolerance is indicated for cancer incidence <20 years.



V.1.2. Second page of CMOST graphical results: adenoma characteristics



Page 2 upper row: distribution of adenomas-1



Left: Fraction of patients with at least 1 early adenoma of at least the indicated stage is indicated as a function of age (P1: 3mm, P2: 5mm, P3: 7mm, P4: 9mm, P5: 1cm or advanced histology, P6: 2cm. 

Middle: Adenoma stage distribution. Fraction of 3mm, 5mm, 7mm, 9mm early adenomas of all early adenomas is indicated; BM: benchmark. The green line indicates agreement with the benchmark, the red line indicates a deviation of at least 20%. The right bars indicate fraction of >1cm (or advanced histology) and >2cm adenomas and the respective benchmarks (BM).

Right: Fraction of adenoma patients with only 1 adenoma, 2 adenomas etc., plotted as a function of age.



Page 2 middle row: distribution of adenomas-2





Left: Distribution of adenomas in the young population (age 40-54 years). The fraction of the population with 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 or more adenomas is indicated. Benchmarks are indicated in blue. Please note that for the young population benchmarking has been inactivated and the color of the markers is meaningless.

Middle: Fraction of individuals with a given number of adenomas for the intermediate population (55-74 years) with benchmarks (blue) and agreement with benchmarks (green) or disagreement (red) with a tolerance of 20%. Please note that 5 indicates 5 or more adenomas. Only this plot (but not the young or the old population) will be used for automated calibration in Step 1.

Right: Fraction of Fraction of individuals with a given number of adenomas for the old population (75-90 years). Colors and labels as for the intermediate population.

 

Page 2 lower row: adenoma summary, origin of cancer









Right: Average number of adenomas for individuals of a given age (mean and standard deviation). The fraction of individuals of the screening population (50-80years) with adenomas, advanced adenomas and cancer is also indicated.

Middle:  Relative danger adenomas. CMOST assumes that most cancers derive from advanced adenomas (P6). However, a fraction of cancers will also derive from smaller adenomas (“fast cancer”). Relative danger indicates the origin of all cancers with adenomatous precursors (most from large adenomas, very few also from small adenomas). The left column indicates numbers from the current run, the middle column benchmarks and the right column agreement with benchmarks (within 20% tolerance – green, outside 20% tolerance – red).

Right: Origin of carcinomas. The origin of carcinomas either “direct, i.e. without adenomatous precursors or an adenoma of a given stage (3, 5, 7, 9 mm, P5 or P6) is indicated as a function of age.



V.1.3. Third page of CMOST graphical results: Cancer characteristics

Page 3 upper row: stage distribution of colorectal cancer



The distribution of cancer stages (stage I… stage IV) are labeled by colors as indicated in the legend. Stage distribution is provided per decade (<50y, 50-59, 60-69, 70-79, 80-89, ≥90), for all patients and the benchmark is indicated (very left of each panel, b-mark).  Green color indicates agreement with the benchmark (within 20% tolerance), red color indicates disagreement with the benchmark. 

CMOST provides results for cancers detected during screening (left), for spontaneous (i.e. symptomatic) cancer and for cancer detected during surveillance.

Page 3 middle row: CRC location





Left: Percentage of carcinoma and stage distribution of cancer according to location (all, rectum, right colon, remaining colon) is indicated.

 Middle/ right: Rectum carcinoma as a fraction of all carcinoma in males (left) and females (right) is indicated according to age. The black line indicates (noisy) raw numbers, blue markers indicate benchmarks. Red or green markers indicate an average of 5 years around the year of the benchmark. Green color indicates that the value is within 20% tolerance of the benchmark, red colors indicate a value outside that tolerance.

Page 3 lower row: direct cancer, dwell time, cumulative cancer







Left: Fraction of direct cancer (i.e. cancer without adenomatous precursors) from all cancer (left bar) and right-sided cancer (right bar). The green line indicates 20%, the red line indicates a 50% value. 

Please note that CMOST assumes that many serrated/ flat/ hard-to-detect lesions preferentially reside in the right colon. Since direct cancer also represents these lesions, direct cancer is located preferentially within the right colon. 

Middle: Box plots of adenoma dwell time is indicated (dwell time is defined as the time from appearance of an adenoma to appearance of colon cancer) for each decade. The box indicates the 25th and 75th percentile of adenoma dwell times. Outliers are indicated by red crosses.

Right: Cumulative cancer as a function of age. The black line indicates the fraction of patients with cancer (present or past, diagnosed or undiagnosed). The blue line indicates the fraction of patients with a past or present diagnosis of cancer. The green line indicates the fraction of patients with multiple cancers.



V.1.4. Fourth page of CMOST graphical results - CRC effects and CRC Screening

Page 4 upper row: CRC mortality



CRC related mortality (according to the SEERS data base) is indicated as a function of the age of the patient for males (left), females (middle) and overall (right). Benchmarks are indicated as blue markers, agreement (within 20%) is indicated by a green color. 

Page 4 middle row: Survival, cause of death, indication colonoscopy



Left: Survival. Percentage of all surviving patients (black), males (blue), female (red) at a given age.  Please note that due to the low CRC incidence changes in CRC related survival are usually not detectable in this plot.

Middle: Causes of death (natural, CRC related, endoscopy related) are indicated. Please note the logarithmic y-scale.

Right: Indications (reasons) for colonoscopy (either for CRC related symptoms, CRC screening, CRC surveillance (i.e. follow up of adenoma or carcinoma) are indicated. Please note the logarithmic y-scale.

Page 4 lower row: adenomas removed, dollars spent, summary

   

Left: Total number of early (red) and advanced (black) adenomas removed.

Middle: CRC related health care costs (related to CRC treatment, CRC screening and CRC follow up) are indicated. 

Right: Verbal summary of the current run of CMOST.



V.2. CMOST Results (Matlab variable)

Most of the results presented by the graphical user interphase are also available as a Matlab output file. The results file OUTPUT_NAME_Results.mat stores the results in a Matlab structure format. The variables stored in this structure can be seen by first loading the results file into Matlab and then looking up the names of the fields:







The description of the benchmarks, benchmark values and the corresponding results from CMOST calculations are stored in the fields BM_Description, Benchmark, and BM_Value. The number of early cancers appearing, for example, is retrieved by typing OUTPUT_NAME_Results.Early_Cancer. Check out Matlab documentation for more detail.



V.3. CMOST Results (Excel File)

CMOST also provides results of a given calculation as an EXCEL-file with self-explaining headlines. Please note that the Mac-version of Matlab does not support the xlswrite-function and generation of Excel-files is not possible using a Macintosh.



VI. Adjusting CMOST

VI.1. Risk



 



Individual risk (upper left): At birth, an individual adenoma risk is assigned to each patient. This risk determines the likelihood of the appearance of a new adenoma (other factors determining adenoma risk are age, gender). A distribution of relative risks is plotted and the relative risk for a given percentage of individuals is indicated (12 bins: 0%, 10%, 20%... 97%, 100%). 

At birth, for each individual a specific risk is drawn from the distribution indicated by the graph. Thereby, 0 indicates no risk of ever getting an adenoma. A high number (compared to the other numbers in this plot) indicate a high adenoma (and subsequently a high cancer risk). 

Note: Individual risk is adjusted during Step 1 of automated parameter calibration. Thereby, anchor points are automatically adjusted

Adenoma risk – early progression (upper right): Risk for progression for an early adenoma. At adenoma initiation, an early adenoma progression risk and an advanced adenoma progression risk is assigned to each adenoma. This risk is randomly drawn from a distribution of risks indicated by the graph and remains constant throughout the lifetime of an adenoma. A low number indicates slow progression of early adenoma, a high number fast progression (and a dangerous adenoma quickly transforming to an advanced adenoma). The distribution of risks can be adjusted as described for individual adenoma risk. 

Adenoma risk – advanced progression (lower right): Risk for progression of an advanced adenoma and subsequent transformation to cancer. The progression risk is randomly drawn at the initiation of an adenoma and remains constant throughout the lifetime of an adenoma. Adjustment as described above.

Correlate: if this box is checked, early and advanced progression for a given adenoma will correlate (i.e. if the 50th percentile of early adenoma progression will be selected, the 50th percentile of advanced adenoma will also be selected, resulting in an adenoma of intermediate progression speed). Default and recommended option: ON 

Note 1: The risk distribution for early and advanced adenoma is a critical parameter. A steep curve or uneven distribution of early and advanced progression risks result in a short adenoma dwell time. Vice versa, a flat curve will result in a long adenoma dwell time.

Note 2: The risk distributions for early and advanced adenomas have to be manually adjusted (no automated adjustment is available). The only way to adjusted adenoma dwell time remains adjustment of the risk curve followed by automated parameter calibration. Since Parameter calibration will also influence adenoma dwell time the effect of adjusting the risk might partially bounce back and several rounds for adjusting the risk curves and parameter calibration might be necessary.

Note 3: We provide 3 preset versions of CMOST with 8, 13 and 19 years dwell time. We did not succeed calibrating a version of CMOST with <8 years dwell time.  



Technical comment: The chance of actual adenoma progression is the product of the individual adenoma-specific progression rate, age specific adenoma progression rate, the gender specific progression rate and the location specific progression rate (this is true for early and advanced adenomas).  

VI.2. Location





This window allows for adjustments in adenoma behavior according to the location of the adenoma. In CMOST, 13 colon segments are considered (1: cecum – 13: rectum).  

New adenoma: the numbers indicated the fraction of new adenomas to be situated in each colon segment.

Adenoma progression, early/ advanced: Progression of early and advanced adenomas can be adjusted. In the current version of CMOST progression of rectal adenomas differs from adenomas in the remaining colon to account for a high rate of rectal carcinomas.

Direct cancer: Location specific probability for the appearance of direct cancer (i.e. cancer without adenomatous precursors. CMOST assumes direct cancer to be situated preferentially within the right colon. 

Detection during colonoscopy: Allows for the adjustment of different adenoma detection rates in various segments of the colon. 

Detection during rectosigmoidoscopy: Allows for the adjustment of different adenoma detection rates in during rectosigmoidoscopy in various segments of the colon. 

Note: With the current settings, CMOST assumes an identical detection rate of rectosigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy

Reach of colonoscopy: Probability that a colonoscopy will reach a certain colon segment

Reach of rectosigmoidoscopy: Probability that a rectosigmoidoscopy will reach a certain colon segment

Return: Return to main window.



VI.3. Mortality

Allows for the adjustment of age dependent CRC specific mortality. To reduce discrepancies in calculated and reported mortality rates, CMOST assumes a 45% increase in CRC mortality beyond age 86 years. 





















VI.4. Colonoscopy 







Allows for the adjustment of critical settings for colonoscopy for the risks for perforation during colonoscopy and rectosigmoidoscopy, death following perforation, serosa burn (i.e. post-polypectomy syndrome), risks for bleeding and severe bleeding. 

Colo-detection: allows for the adjustment of the probability for detection of the indicated lesions during colonoscopy.

Rectosigmo-detection: allows for the adjustment of the probability for detection of the indicated lesions during rectosigmoidoscopy.

Note: With the current settings, CMOST assumes the detection rate of rectosigmoidscopy for early adenomas to be 25% lower, for advanced adenomas to be 12.5% lower than for colonoscopy

Colonoscopy rate (base line colonoscopy rate) will be implemented in a later version of CMOST.

VI.5. Costs



Allows for the adjustment of costs of the indicated interventions (upper left corner), complications of interventions (lower left corner) and cancer treatment. Cancer treatment is thereby divided in an initial year (1st year), a terminal year (the year before the patient will die if applicable) and continuous care (time after the first year until year 5 or terminal year). 



VI.6. Screening





Screening: allows for the adjustment of screening interventions.

7 screening interventions are implemented (colonoscopy, rectosigmoidoscopy, FOBT, I-FOBT, Septin-9, other). These interventions can be combined but the selected fraction of the population will adhere to the indicated screening test for the rest of its life. For each screening intervention the following parameters can be adjusted:

Left side:

Fraction of population (0…1): fraction of the population that will chose a given screening test

adherence: fraction of population that will use the screening test at each indicated time point (0…1)

follow-up: adherence to the follow up investigation (i.e. colonoscopy after a positive screening test; 0…1).

y start: year at which screening will be started

y end: year at which screening will end

interval: interval at which screening tests will be applied (for instance 1, 2 or 5 years)

y after colo: time interval in years that CMOST will wait for another round of screening after the last colonoscopy (performed for whatever reasons)

specificity: for detection of colonic lesions (determines the false positive rate) 

Right side: Sensitivity for the detection of the indicated lesions.

Fraction not screened: determines the fraction of the population which will not undergo a screening test.

VI.7. Adenoma dwell time

Dwell time is the time from the appearance of a clinically detectable adenoma to it developing into cancer. The graphical outputs show dwell time on page 3. Further, loading the results file OUTPUT_NAME_Results.mat, loads a Matlab structured variable Results. In it, Results.Variable{18} gives the dwell time. 



Dwell time is a result of the time spent by the adenoma in several stages, and if a model with different dwell time is desired, it is not straight-forward to precisely adjust the dwell time. CMOST8, CMOST13, CMOST19 are preset with 8 years, 13 years and 19 years of dwell time. This range covers the range of dwell time covered by other microsimulations. 



We recommend adjusting the risks for early and advanced adenoma progression (see VI.1. Risk). However, this step will not only change adenoma dwell time but also several additional parameters. Therefore, all remaining parameters need to be re-adjusted (preferentially automatically, see VII.  Parameter optimization). The adjustment will partially reverse the dwell time. Therefore, several rounds of risk adjustment and parameter optimization might be necessary to achieve the desired dwell time.  

VII. Parameter optimization

This section is specifically for advanced users, who would like to use their own benchmark parameters to create the CMOST settings file and to perform calculations using them. An early user wanting to reproduce the calculations with the default CMOST settings can ignore this section.



Parameterization approach: CMOST is a very detailed model with many different parameters. For example, the new polyp appearance is a sigmoid function parameterized by three parameters. The early polyp progression is assumed to be of Gaussian form and is parameterized by three additional parameters. Inclusion of all parameters used for describing the model would make it difficult if not impossible to obtain an automated parameter estimation. 



In order to achieve the results in a quick way, two strategies were adopted – 

The comparison of the calculated results to benchmarks is made in four steps. It was observed during the calculations that these four-steps behaved almost independently of each other. Making this step-wise parameterization reduces the complexity from simultaneously optimizing twenty parameters to fewer parameters in each step.

The parameter space was not explored with all possible combinations of the parameter values, but instead, in an initial step the parameters were corrected iteratively, depending on how far the calculated results were from the predictions. This greedy algorithm approach makes the exploration of the parameter space directed towards achieving the benchmarks provided. For some key parameters this is followed by a systematic unbiased search using the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm.



While the biology of colorectal cancer is complicated, at a very simple level of description, colorectal cancer has two kinds of origins – adenomatous polyps that can be detected in a colonoscopy, and flat/ serrated polyps (or non-polyp lesions) that are hard to be detected by colonoscopy. The latter kind of lesions are accounted for by the “direct cancer” pathways, i.e. cancer without adenomatous precursors.



Evolution from adenomas or without adenomas as well as the incidence of colorectal cancer defines the natural history of colorectal cancer, in the absence of any screening interventions. 



Parameter calibration is done in 4 separate steps:

Early adenoma prevalence and distribution

Advanced adenoma prevalence and distribution

Cancer incidence

Direct cancer

Number and size (or stage) distribution of adenomas and cancer as a function of age and gender – observed either in colonoscopy studies or in autopsy studies are used as benchmarks. Direct cancer (step 4) is benchmarked in an indirect way using the data of a rectosigmoidoscopy randomized control trials.

VII.1. Step 1: Early adenomas

VII.1.1. Early adenoma benchmarks





Left (overall): Prevalence of early adenoma overall (i.e. males and females). The number indicates the fraction of individuals with at least one (early or advanced) adenoma. To add another benchmark just add a new year and an adenoma prevalence. The sort button (lower right in this window) will sort all benchmarks according to age. Below all benchmarks are illustrated with a graph 

Second from left (male): As above, male population

Middle (female): As above, female population

Second from right – Multiple adenoma: Numbers indicate the fraction of individuals with exactly 1 adenoma, 2, 3, 4 adenomas or 5 or more adenomas. Here the population 55-74 years of age is considered.

Right graph - Distribution of adenoma stage: Distribution of adenoma stages (i.e. fraction or percentage of adenomas at a given stage (i.e. 3mm, 5mm, 7mm, 9mm)

Technical comment: for optimization step 1 only adenoma stages I-IV are considered (the sum of the number adenoma stages I-IV is used as 100%); for optimization step 2 only adenoma V and VI will be considered. 

Sort: sort benchmarks according to age.

Return: return to main window. 

VII.1.2. Optimizing early adenomas 





CMOST will try to optimize overall, male and female adenoma prevalence, distribution of multiple adenomas within the population and adenoma stage distribution I-IV. 

In the first set of iterations heuristic, customized algorithms will be used to approach an optimum. In the second set of algorithm a Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm will be used to refine this optimum. After an optimum is found the user will be asked, whether the parameters found should be kept.

1st iteration: number of calculations for first set of iteration (heuristic algorithms)

2nd iteration: number of calculations for second set of iteration (Nelder-Mead)

Start: start optimization procedure

Stop: stop optimization procedure (the current run will be finished)

Return: return to main window. 

Technical comment 1: 

For adenoma prevalence the age dependent new adenoma rate is adjusted (3 coefficients of a sigmoid curve, see manuscript). In addition, CMOST adjusts a scaling factor for adenoma appearance in females to minimize the differences to the benchmarks in males and females.  

For distribution of multiple adenomas the distribution of individual risks for the population is adjusted

For the adenoma stage distribution, the stage specific adenoma progression rates are adjusted according to the square root of the ratio of observed vs. expected relative prevalence. 

Technical comment 2:

Using these benchmarks, the following two internal vectors are adjusted:

 New polyp appearance, which is a vector with the relative likelihood of appearance of adenomas for each year between ages 0 and 99. 

 Individual Risk (vector with 500 numbers): This vector determines the distribution of individual risks. This distribution might be flat (i.e. very similar cancer and adenoma risks between individuals) or steep (i.e. uneven, highly different adenoma and carcinoma risks). CMOST assumes each simulated individual to have a person specific risk for adenoma appearance. This individual risk is drawn from a distribution of these 500 numbers. This risk may be due to heredity, nutrition, or other factors. A distribution of individual risks is calculated and benchmarked using the distribution of multiple adenomas (a high frequency of multiple adenomas can only be achieved if an uneven distribution of individual risks are assumed (i.e., many high-risk individuals compared to average)





VII.2. Step 2: Advanced adenomas

VII.2.1. Advanced adenoma benchmarks 





Left: prevalence of advanced adenomas (percentage of individuals with at least 1 advanced adenoma 1cm or 2cm; i.e. P5 or P6).

Middle left: same as above, male population

Middle right: same as above, female population

Right: distribution of adenoma, compare Benchmarks Step 1, above  

Sort: will sort benchmarks according to the year

VII.2.2. Optimizing advanced adenomas





General strategy: CMOST will optimize overall, male and female advanced adenoma prevalence, and adenoma stage distribution of advanced adenomas (P5: advanced adenoma >1cm or advanced histology, P6: advanced adenoma >2cm). 

In the first set of iterations customized heuristic algorithms will be used to approach an optimum. In the second set of algorithm a Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm will be used to refine this optimum. After an optimum is found the user will be asked, whether the parameters found should be kept.

In addition, a scaling factor for adenoma progression for females will be adjusted to account for different advanced adenoma distributions for females and males. This scaling factor is not reported.



1st iteration: number of calculations for first set of iterations

2nd iteration: number of calculations for second set of iterations

Adjust Adv. Adenoma, Adjust adenoma distribution: adjustments can be activated/ inactivated separately. 

Start: start optimization procedure

Stop: stop optimization procedure (the current run will be finished)

Return: return to main window. 

Technical comments: 

For advanced adenoma prevalence the age dependent early adenoma progression rate is adjusted (3 coefficients of a Gaussian curve, see manuscript). In addition, CMOST adjusts a correction factor for adenoma appearance in females to minimize the differences to the benchmarks in males and females.  

For the adenoma stage distribution P5/ P6 the stage specific adenoma progression rates is adjusted according to the square root of the ratio of observed vs. expected relative prevalence. 

VII.3. Step 3: Optimizing cancer

VII.3.1. Benchmarks for cancer optimization







Left: incidence of carcinoma whole population

Middle left: same as above, male population

Middle right: same as above, female population

Upper right - relative danger of adenoma. This parameter is benchmarked reversely; we estimate that the indicated fraction of carcinoma were derived from an adenoma of the indicated stage.  For instance, 1% of all carcinoma originated directly within an adenoma of 9mm size (stage IV = P4), skipping the P5 stage (>1cm) and the P6 stage (>2cm).

Lower right – fraction of rectum carcinoma: A disproportionate fraction of carcinoma is observed in the rectum. Benchmarks can be added for adjustment of the fraction of rectum carcinoma (only the second and the third benchmark, i.e. the 5 year span around year 62 and 72  will be used).

Sort: will sort incidence benchmarks according to the year

Return: return to main window



VII.3.1. Optimizing cancer parameters





General strategy: CMOST will optimize overall, male and female carcinoma adenoma prevalence, the relative danger of adenomas (i.e. the fraction of carcinomas derived from each type of adenomas other than P6-adenoma (>2cm)) and the fraction of rectum carcinoma. 

In the first set of iterations customized heuristic algorithms will be used to approach an optimum. In the second set of algorithm a Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm will be used to refine this optimum. After an optimum is found the user will be asked, whether the parameters found should be kept.

1st iteration: number of calculations for first set of iteration

2nd iteration: number of calculations for second set of iteration

Adjust fraction rectum, Adjust cancer, Adjust relative danger adenoma: adjustments can be activated/ inactivated separately. 

Start: start optimization procedure

Stop: stop optimization procedure (the current run will be finished)

Return: return to main window. 

Technical comments: 

For carcinoma incidence the age dependent advanced adenoma progression rate is adjusted (3 coefficients of a Gaussian curve, see manuscript). In addition, CMOST adjusts a correction factor for advanced adenoma progression in females to minimize the differences to the benchmarks in males and females.  

For the relative danger adenoma a conversion factor for each type of adenoma is adjusted according to the square root of the ratio of observed vs. expected relative prevalences. 

For adjusting the fraction of rectum carcinoma the location specific progression rate of rectum adenomas (early and advanced) will be adjusted.



VII.4. Step 4: Adjusting direct cancer

VII.4.1. Benchmarks for adjusting direct cancer 







Incidence reduction overall: incidence reduction by sigmoidoscopy screening. This parameter will be used for benchmarking.

Incidence reduction right/ left, mortality reduction: the respective outcomes in the rectosigmoidoscopy study. These parameters are not used for benchmarking.

Comment: due to specific differences in the rectosigmoidoscopy studies (i.e. age of population, 1 or 2 screening interventions (Schoen et al., NEJM 2012), adherence to screening etc.) incidence reduction only makes sense in connection with the selection of the study (see VII.4.1., below). 

VII.4.1. Optimizing direct cancer parameters





General strategy: CMOST uses data from randomized controlled rectosigmoidoscopy studies for the adjustment of direct cancer. Direct cancer is assumed to be localized mainly in the right-sided colon, modeled by a sigmoid curve (see manuscript). CMOST adjusts only the maximum of this sigmoid curve. Thereby, the variable “DirectCancerSpeed” (direct cancer variable) will be adjusted using the square root of the expected vs. observed incidence reduction rates for overall carcinoma.

Graph incidence reduction: for the calculations the trends in incidence reduction overall (yellow), incidence reduction left colon (blue) and incidence reduction right colon (red) are indicated.

Graph direct cancer variable: Trends in the variable “DirectCancerSpeed” are indicated.

Max. iterations: Number of iterations 

Number averaging: At the end of the calculations the last n individual direct cancer speeds will be averaged (to reduce noise) and the resulting number used further on.

Scenario: 3 scenarios are modeled by CMOST, the user can choose either: “Atkin et al., Lancet 2010”, “Schoen et al., NEJM 2012”, “Holme et al., JAMA 2014” or “Segnan, JNCI 2011”.

Start: start calculations

Stop: stop calculations (the current run will be finished)

Return: return to main window



VII.5. Suggested scheme for automated calibration

We suggest to run all 4 optimization steps sequentially and adjust the number of trials and the size of the patient population:

Step 1: 25’000 patients, 10 trials first iteration, 30 trials second iteration

Step 2: 50’000 patients, 30 trials first iteration, 60 trials second iteration

Step 3: 100’000 patients, 50 trials first iteration, 60 trials second iteration

Step 4: 100’000 patients, 30 trials first iteration, averaging the last 10 iterations

Comments: 

Variables will only be transferred if the user applies the “Return” button in each window, not simply by closing the windows.

Calculations for step 1 and 2 will be fast. Step 3 can take one hour. If calculations are excessively slow please check that the coder option has been appropriately used (section VII).

VII.6. Alternative strategy for Step 4, adjustment of direct cancer

Since simulation of even a population as large as 100’000 results in some noise in the data, we designed another way to adjust direct cancer. Thereby the “direct cancer variable” will be systematically varied to span the range of reasonable values with a selected number of repeats; results will be averaged and the most appropriate value used.



Load the settings for which you want to adjust the direct cancer variable.

 Menu Option  

	 autocalibration step 4 rectosigmo

		 Automatic RS tests writing

You will be able to choose the number of repeats. For the settings calculated for CMOST we used 25 repeats, resulting in 15x25 = 375 calculations.

Calculations can be done on a Linux cluster (recommended, see section VII.2) or using the Starter Option (Section VII.1).



After calculations are finished, results can be summarized:

 Menu Option  

	 autocalibration step 4 rectosigmo

		 Automatic RS tests reading



Results might look as follows:

  



In the plot above, results of an individual repeat are shown in blue, the averaged value in red, the trendline is indicated by a blue line. The benchmark for overall incidence reduction is indicated by a thin blue line. The point where the both lines cross is calculated and the best value for cancer variable extracted.

The user will be asked, whether the calculated Cancer variable should be kept, if yes it will be replaced in the settings.

VII.7. Concomitant adjustment of Steps 1-3

Steps 1-3 can be run subsequently (see above) with graphical representation of key parameters. However, CMOST also supports optimization of Steps 1-3 in a single procedure. This can be done from the CMOST Main window or on the cluster.



 Menu Option  

	 Calibration step 1, 2, 3

		 Autocalibration step 123

The current settings will be used as a starting point. CMOST will perform the following steps:

Step 1: With population size 25’000, 10 and 30 repeats for the first and second set of iterations, respectively 

Step 2: With population size 50’000, 30 and 60 repeats for the first and second set of iterations, respectively 

Step 3: With population size 100’000, 30 and 60 repeats for the first and second set of iterations, respectively 

Step 2+3 with population size 100’000, 100 iterations

CMOST will start running the calculations; no graphical output is provided. The results of the calculations will be put back to CMOST main window. Calculations might need several hours. For best results we suggest performing this automated calibration on a Linux cluster; thereby, several calculations can be run in parallel (see section X.2).



Note: For the combination of step 2 + 3 the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm will be used only. It can be useful to achieve even more precise fitting since some interferences between steps 2 and 3 are present. This combined mode is not available with a graphical user interphase.



We also developed automated calibration using bootstrapping. Thereby, for each settings parameter an artificial population with the size of the original study (source data) with the same distribution of the parameter as in the original study (source data) will be generated. For each parameter individuals will be randomly drawn and a new study population is generated (with the size of the original study). Since each individual can be drawn more than once, some fluctuation of each parameter will be present. Bootstrapping addresses the uncertainty of calculations. Bootstrapping has not been sufficiently tested and usage is currently not recommended.  

VII.8. Manual adjustments





CMOST also supports visualization and manual adjustment of all parameters. This would be an alternative strategy to automated calibration. The user would need to manually change parameters in this window, press Return to transfer parameters to main window and press Start in the main window, followed by inspection of the matlab figures or .pdf files. With experience, with 30-50 iterations good agreement of all parameters can be achieved.

Manual calibration results in slightly better agreement with benchmarks and ultimately provides an intuitive understanding of the model parameters. However, we recommended the objective approach provided by the automated calibration. 

New polyp rate: for each increment of 5 years an age-specific adenoma appearance rate can be entered. CMOST will interpolate the rates for the years in between. 

Technical comment: for the automated settings a sigmoid curve with 3 parameters is assumed and the individual points will be calculated. 

Early polyp progression: as for new polyp, only the age specific early adenoma progression rate can be adjusted.

Advanced polyp progression: as for new polyp, only the age specific advanced adenoma progression rate can be adjusted.

Direct cancer: The age specific direct cancer rate can be adjusted separately for males and for females. For the settings provided by the authors, the direct cancer rate follows the cancer incidence benchmarks. Direct cancer refers to cancer without adenomatous precursors.

Technical comment: 

The probability of direct cancer will be the result of the direct cancer rate and “direct cancer speed”. 

In the current settings the direct cancer rate equals the carcinoma incidence

Progression: adenoma stage specific progression rates can be adjusted. These rates determine the probability of progression for instance from a polyp 5mm (stage II, P2) to a polyp 7mm (stage III, P3).

Technical comment: The rate of actual progression will be the product of stage-specific progression rate, age-specific early or advanced adenoma progression rate, gender-specific correction factor and a location specific correction factor. 

Fast cancer:  Refers to cancer directly derived from adenoma stages other than P6 (advanced adenoma >2cm). The probabilities of conversion to cancer for each adenoma stage can be adjusted here (very low for small adenomas and relevant only for large adenomas P5, >1cm). 

Healing: CMOST assumes a low probability of adenoma regression, to be adjusted in this windows. Adenoma healing is not calibrated. 

Female gender: Correction factors to control for the fraction of females within the general population (at birth), appearance of new adenoma, progression of early adenoma and progression of advanced adenoma.  

Direct cancer speed: allows for adjusting the fraction of direct cancer (i.e. without adenomatous precursors) in the population.

VII.9. Default benchmarks

No new window will open, but all benchmarks will be reverted to the default settings provided by the authors.

VIII.  Speed of calculations

VIII.1. Speed limit 

CMOST calculation handles large arrays. It loops over a population of (say) 100,000 individuals, following each of them over 100 years, and the number of adenomas which can be up to 50. Handling the large data and calculations in Matlab makes it slow, requiring about 20 minutes to finish such a calculation on a 2.5 GHz and 4 GB RAM machine. This is because calculations by Matlab codes can be much slower than their C or C++ counterparts. 



VIII.2. Accelerating speed: the coder option

The computationally intensive part of CMOST is a function NumberCrunching.m which is called from the subroutine Calculate_Sub.m. 

Matlab offers a way to accelerate the calculations to achieve speeds comparable to C programs. This option called coder and is called with the Matlab function “codegen”. 

Important note: CMOST is provided with converted files for PC and Macintosh,for some machines (64-bit machines). For best performance it might be necessary to generate NumberCrunching.mex anew. Conversion is also necessary after each modification in the NumberCrunching function. If no appropriate .mex file is available, a warning will appear.

Due to technical requirements of the Matlab function “codegen”, it is necessary to compile NumberCrunching for each number of patients (i.e. 10’000, 25’000, 50’000, 100’000). One additional routine (QuickRS, evaluating results of the simulated randomized rectosigmoidoscopy studies) also needs to be converted.

Specifically, the conversion is achieved by the following steps:

Start Matlab

Change path to the CMOST folder
cd /Users/USERNAME/Documents/CMOST 
(the command pwd will print the current path, cd .. moves on step up in the folder hierarchy, cd FOLDERNAME one step down, consult Matlab documentation for details)

Change to the codegen folder
cd codegen

Load variables
load Variables_100000.mat

Change to CMOST path
cd ..

Use Matlab command “codegen” on NumberCrunching
codegen NumberCrunching_100000 -args All

Repeat these steps for 50000, 25000, 10000 patients
cd codegen, load Variables_50000.mat, cd .., codegen NumberCrunching_50000 -args All
cd codegen, load Variables_25000.mat, cd .., codegen NumberCrunching_25000 -args All
cd codegen, load Variables_10000.mat, cd .., codegen NumberCrunching_10000 -args All

Do codegen for one subprogram evaluating results of the simulated randomized rectosigoidsocopy studies
cd codegen /, load RS_Variables_100000, cd .., codegen QuickRS -args All

c



After NumberCrunching.m module is converted to NumberCrunching_mex.mex, it is called in the function Calculate_Subroutine.m exactly with the same arguments, with only a difference in the name. NumberCrunching_mex is capable of performing faster calculations (in our experience 20X faster).

IX. Running CMOST in batch mode

IX.1. Using the STARTER option

Press the “starter” button in the main window for following window:



The starter option allows to select individual saved settings_files as a pipeline. These settings files can then be subsequently run by CMOST (settings files can also be considered instruction files for a run of CMOST). One convenient way to generate settings files would be the “Scan Variable” option. 

Add item: Browse and select for Settings files

Add folder: a folder with all settings files can be added to the pipeline

Delete: delete individual files

Up, Down: change order of files 

Return: return to main window.

Comment: If files have been selected the “start batch” button will be active and the pipeline can be started.

IX.2. Parallel Calculations on a Linux cluster

Calculations can be performed on a linux cluster. This allows parallel processing of many jobs and tremendously increases the power of CMOST. However, the setup of each cluster is different and not general solution can be provided. The following steps will work on the Linux cluster Euler at ETH Zurich. If the setup of your cluster differs, consult the cluster administration for support. Matlab and appropriate compiler need to be installed on the cluster.

Adjust Foldernames in CMOSTCluster.m 
Open CMOSTCluster.m in the Matlab Editor (if you do not know what this means, consult Matlab documentation)
Adapt line 25:
addpath ('/cluster/home/USERNAME/CMOST')

Adjust Foldernames in CMOSTCluster_Calibration_Step123.m
Open CMOSTCluster_Calibration_Step123.m in the Matlab Editor 
Adapt line 25:
addpath ('/cluster/home/USERNAME/CMOST')

Copy CMOST from your computer to the Linus-Cluster
From a Mac Terminal the following commands will work:
scp –r /Users/USERNAME/Documents/CMOST USERNAME@euler.ethz.ch:/cluster/home/USERNAME
Note: paths on your computer or Linux cluster might look quite different. 

Copy bash scripts to cluster
We will setup the cluster to be able to do 2 things: 1) calculations using a provided settings-file (i.e. instruction file). 2) automated parameter calibration. For that 4 scripts need to be copied: 
a) submit_standard, Calib_submit (for automated submission of jobs)
b) CMOSTClusterSub, CMOSTClusterSub_Calib  (subroutine called by the previous programs)

From a Mac terminal the following commands would work:
scp /Users/USERNAME/Documents/CMOST/Cluster/bash_Scripts/submit_standard USERNAME@euler.ethz.ch:/cluster/home/USERNAME
scp /Users/USERNAME/Documents/CMOST/Cluster/bash_Scripts/Calib_submit USERNAME@euler.ethz.ch:/cluster/home/USERNAME
scp /Users/USERNAME/Documents/CMOST/Cluster/bash_Scripts/CMOSTClusterSub USERNAME@euler.ethz.ch:/cluster/home/USERNAME
scp /Users/USERNAME/Documents/CMOST/Cluster/bash_Scripts/CMOSTClusterSub_Calib  USERNAME@euler.ethz.ch:/cluster/home/USERNAME

Login to the cluster
ssh USERNAME@euler.ethz.ch

Make bash scripts executable
chmod +x submit_standard
chmod +x Calib_submit
chmod +x CMOSTClusterSub 
chmod +x CMOSTClusterSub_Calib

Generate Data folder and folders for output
mkdir Data
mkdir JobOutput
mkdir Data_Calib
mkdir JobOutput_Calib

Copy data to the cluster
Copy files for calculations:
scp –r /Users/USERNAME/Documents/YOURDATAFOLDER USERNAME@euler.ethz.ch:/cluster/home/USERNAME/Data
(this will copy a whole folder with settings files = instruction files to the cluster, this might be settings files systematically varying for the year of the screening colonoscopy)

AND/ OR copy files for automated parameter calibration:
scp –r /Users/USERNAME/Documents/YOURDATAFOLDER USERNAME@euler.ethz.ch:/cluster/home/USERNAME/Data_Calib
(this files will be used as starting points for automated parameter calibration)

Start Matlab
module load matlab/8.5 (loads matlab to be started)
matlab –nojvm
(this will start Matlab without java virtual machine and thus without the graphical user interphase which usually does not work on a busy Linux login node. However, operating Matlab from the command line will work) 

do codegen for all files necessary (see also VII.2 the coder option)
in Matlab:
cd /cluster/home/USERNAME/CMOST
cd codegen, load Variables_100000.mat, cd .., codegen NumberCrunching_100000 –args All
cd codegen, load Variables_50000.mat, cd .., codegen NumberCrunching_50000 –args All
cd codegen, load Variables_25000.mat, cd .., codegen NumberCrunching_25000 –args All
cd codegen, load Variables_10000.mat, cd .., codegen NumberCrunching_10000 –args All
cd codegen /, load RS_Variables_100000, cd .., codegen QuickRS –args All

Start calculations
./submit_standard (for submitting files for calculations)
./Calib_submit (for submitting files for calibrations)

Notes: 
- You can use bjobs to follow how many jobs are currently running
- During calculations for each settings file one results file in the form
ORIGINALFILENAME_Results.mat will be generated. 
- By checking the data folder you can also follow progress
cd ./Data/YOURDATAFOLDER
ls
for each original settings file one results file should be present.
- You can follow the JobOutput folder for troubleshooting
cd ./JobOutput
vi YOURDATAFILE

Copy data back to your local computer and summarize data

IX.3. Generating multiple settings files with the “Scan Variables” option

 

Purpose: “Scan variables” generates a number of settings files which differ systematically in only 1 parameter (or several parameters as specified below). This parameter could for instance be the year of a screening colonoscopy. This option efficiently generates settings files (=instruction files) without the need of manually changing one parameter and saving the file.  

Scan: 1 CMOST parameter (or 2…5 parameters) will be changed

2D scan: 2 parameters will be individually changed (generating a 2D matrix of parameters)

3D scan: 3 parameters will be individually changed (generating a 3D matrix of parameters)

Number variables: only active for “scan” (single variable). Up to 5 individual variables can be chosen (Variable 1…5). 

Number steps: Determines the number of individual steps a variable will be tested (for instance, for testing a single screening colonoscopy could be tested in 50 individual steps from age 30 to age 79). Therefore, 50 settings files would be generated.

Number steps 2 and 3: Number of individual steps for the 2nd and 3rd variable (for instance, 3 individual screening colonoscopies could be tested at age 30 to 79 and 50x50x50 = 125’000 individual settings files that would be generated. 

Choose: Choose an individual parameter that will be varied. However, this requires navigating through the variables of CMOST. However, naming of the variables is usually self-explanatory and follows mainly the structure of the various graphical user interphases. In case of a doubt the settings files generated can be reloaded in CMOST and the graphical user interphases can be inspected .

Subposition: Several variables have subpositions (for instance screening has options for percentage of population, adherence etc. as in the “Screening” graphical user interphase).  In the example with 3 screening colonoscopies the variable name would be “Sreening.Colonoscopy” and the subpositions 3, 4 and 5.

Minimum, Maximum: minimum and maximum value of the respective variable (for the example with screening colonoscopies, minimum would be 30 and maximum 79). 

Adjust: before files can be generated CMOST wants the user to confirm (possibly after adjustment) the individual values for each step (for instance, for screening colonoscopies year 29.1 would be meaningless).

Filename: base filename for the files to be generated.

Linker: for the naming of the files, positioned between baseline and the number for an individual file 

Browse: Browse for a path to save the settings files to be generated

Economy: if checked double positions (for instance 2 colonoscopies at age 50/ 60 and 60/ 50 will be avoided. This reduces the number of files and the time for calculations. 

Number repeats: Each settings file can be generated once or with a given number of repeats. Repeating calculations (and subsequent averaging) will reduce noise.

Linker repeats: Each file generated as a repeat will have in the file name the repeat number attached with a linker string between filename and this number. This linker can be selected.

Create files: create settings files in the respective folder.

Return: return to main menu.

IX.4. Simulating large populations 

Colorectal cancer incidence is approximately 5%. And the incidence reduction could be about 30% of this, which is about 1.5%. The risks of colonoscopy are even smaller. Performing calculations on a small group of 100,000 can lead to stochastic errors because of the small percentages. Since it is a theoretical model, it is better to perform the calculations on large populations of a few million in order to get the predictions right. 



However, the memory requirements are very high, and a typical calculation for a population of 100,000 requires more than 2 GB memory. In avoid memory and processing limitations in performing the calculations on large populations, we split the population into multiple jobs. For example, to perform a calculation of 300,000 using the settings of CMOST13.mat, CMOST13 can be saved as CMOST13_1, CMOST13_2 and CMOST13_3 and calculated using the cluster or the Starter option. 



Results have to be summarized using custom made scripts. Examples for these scripts can be found in the Scripts folder in the CMOST folder. These scripts can be used as a guide and modified for generation of scripts for different purposes.



